---
layout: post
title:  "Clay - ray tracer in Rust and OpenCL"
date:   2019-09-17 08:37:00 +0700
---

## Preface

Hello! My name is Alexey and I'm interested in many things including physics, mathematics and computer science.

I like computer graphics and especially ray tracing because being based only on a few physical rules it is able to produce beautiful images.

Sometimes a new interesting (as it seems to me) idea about ray tracing comes to my mind. To verify such idea it's sometimes necessary to implement it as a computer program which requires a lot of boilerplate code. It would be nice to have some flexible framework for experimenting with ray tracing.

### Existing solutions

Some existing ray tracing engines are proprietary, some are too specialized and aren't flexible enough. I've found amazing [Mitsuba renderer](https://www.mitsuba-renderer.org/) which is open-source, research-oriented and very customizable. But it seems to be relatively heavy and complex, and, what is most important, it is quite slow for short-time rendering (according to [this article](https://www.cg.tuwien.ac.at/research/publications/2018/glanz-2017-pbrcomparison/) it performs around *one* sample per pixel per second for 800x600 pixels on sufficiently complex scene). Note, that in long run it could perform much better because of using advanced techniques like Metropolis light transport that converges faster than simple backward light propagation. But for fast prototyping it's undesirable to wait for minutes to get perceptible image, we should get it as fast as possible - in real-time in the ideal case.

### Previous work

I've already implemented some kind of ray tracing engine while trying to render parametric surfaces like biquadratic Bezier patches ([source code](https://github.com/agerasev/cltracer), [demo](https://youtu.be/Fz5wcgmms_Q)). It is written in C++ and OpenCL and is quite fast - it renders a scene of sufficient quality in real-time because it runs on GPU (around 100 samples per pixel per second for 800x600 pixels on GTX 970). Here is the video rendered by it:

{% include youtube_player.html id="Fz5wcgmms_Q" %}

But this ray tracing engine is very specialized for its current task and it would be quite painful to adapt it for a new one.

So I decided to implement a new ray tracing engine with GPGPU support using fresh new tools and taking previous mistakes into account. 

## The new ray tracer

This time I'm focusing on modularity and extendability of the project to make it possible to re-use it in different applications.

I've decided to use [Rust programming language](https://www.rust-lang.org/) for the host part of the project because it is as fast as C/C++ but much more reliable at the same time. It has strict but flexible type system with compile-time checks and such system allows to implement modularity in convenient and reliable way. Also Rust has friendly community and rich ecosystem of useful tools and libraries.

I continue to use [OpenCL](https://www.khronos.org/opencl/) for implementing the device part because it is the one of the most popular frameworks for GPGPU programming and has the widest range of supported devices (unlike CUDA).

The name **Clay** is chosen due to self-named material which is plastic and able to take any desired form during fabrication but becomes hard and reliable after the production is complete. Also this name could be considered as some letters from 'Open**CL** R**ay** tracer'.

Much more information about project, its principles, architecture and usage could be found on the [main page of the project](/) and [corresponding](/architecture) [subsections](/usage).

The project is licensed under dual *MIT/Apache-2.0* license, so you can freely use, modufy and redistribute the program even for commercial purposes.

## Results

For now the minimal skeleton of the project is almost complete, but it could be changed and extended in future releases. And there are only very basic set of implementations of shapes, materials, etc. for the moment, but it should and will be extended in future.

There are little set of examples to demonstrating current capabilities of the engine. You can find them [here](/usage/#examples).

### Benchmarking

In the following table the platforms where I've tried to run Clay are listed along with their relative performance. Performance was measured for relatively heavy `05_indirect_lighting` example at initial position of camera and the viewport size was `800x600`. Performance is represented in last column as *number of samples per pixel per second* (the value printed by `FrameCounter` as `FPS`).

| Platform             | Device               | OS      | Samples |
|----------------------|----------------------|---------|---------|
| AMD APP              | Radeon RX 570        | Windows | 91      |
| NVIDIA CUDA          | GeForce GTX 970      | Linux   | 64      |
| NVIDIA CUDA          | GeForce 840M         | Windows | 12      |
| Intel OpenCL         | HD Graphics 4400     | Windows | 10      |
| POCL                 | Intel Core i7-2600K  | Linux   | 0.45    |

`05_indirect_lighting` example renders simple interior of the room illuminated by secondary rays. To trace sufficient number of paths to simulate global illumination the maximum number of ray bounces is set to *8*. We may estimate the average number of actual bounces per sample to be *6.2* considering importance sampling probability was *0.1* and that almost all rays stay in such closed space until the end. That means that about *190 millions* of rays are simulated per second on GTX 970, and about *270 millions* - on RX 570.

## Contribution

Contributions are extremely welcome. The project is designed to be very powerful, but for now it contains only basic functionality, so there is a lot of things to implement.

Here is the possible directions of work:

+ *New shapes, materials, etc.* - there are only basic primitives like ellipse and parallelepiped added for testing purposes, but it is possible to add various types of objects like composite objects (made of polygons, for example), scalar function for ray marching, some objects for volumetric rendering and many others.
+ *New techniques of raytracing* - for now there is only basic backward ray propagation technique implemented with some improvement in importance sampling. But it would be great to implement some advanced techniques like bidirectional ray tracing, Metropolis light transport, photon maps and other ones.
+ *Tests and debugging* - the project lacks of testing a lot. Tests should be added to check current functionality and avoid regression in the future, as well as testing new features.
+ *Optimization and benchmarking* - there are a lot of unoptimized performance-critical code. Also a reliable method of performance measurement is requred.
+ *Documentation* - it would be nice to add more user-friendly documentation, examples and tutorials.
+ *Project architecture* - some ideas of extending or improving core structure to make the project more suitable for some new functionality or fix some flaws may be provided and considered.
