---
layout: post
title:  "Clay - ray tracer in Rust and OpenCL"
date:   2019-09-06 16:29:54 +0700
---

You’ll find this post in your `_posts` directory. Go ahead and edit it and re-build the site to see your changes. You can rebuild the site in many different ways, but the most common way is to run `jekyll serve`, which launches a web server and auto-regenerates your site when a file is updated.

To add new posts, simply add a file in the `_posts` directory that follows the convention `YYYY-MM-DD-name-of-post.ext` and includes the necessary front matter. Take a look at the source for this post to get an idea about how it works.

Jekyll also offers powerful support for code snippets:

{% highlight ruby %}
def print_hi(name)
  puts "Hi, #{name}"
end
print_hi('Tom')
#=> prints 'Hi, Tom' to STDOUT.
{% endhighlight %}

Check out the [Jekyll docs][jekyll-docs] for more info on how to get the most out of Jekyll. File all bugs/feature requests at [Jekyll’s GitHub repo][jekyll-gh]. If you have questions, you can ask them on [Jekyll Talk][jekyll-talk].

[jekyll-docs]: https://jekyllrb.com/docs/home
[jekyll-gh]:   https://github.com/jekyll/jekyll
[jekyll-talk]: https://talk.jekyllrb.com/

Here is the possible directions of contribution:

+ *New shapes, materials, etc.* - there are only basic primitives like ellipse and parallelepiped added for testing purposes, but it is possible to add various types of objects like composite objects (made of polygons, for example), scalar function for ray marching, some objects for volumetric rendering and many others.
+ *New techniques of raytracing* - for now there is only basic backward ray propagation technique implemented with some improvement in importance sampling. But it would be great to implement some advanced techniques like bidirectional ray tracing, Metropolis light transport, photon maps and other ones.
+ *Tests and debugging* - the project lacks of testing a lot. Tests should be added to check current functionality and avoid regression in the future, as well as testing new features.
+ *Documentation* - it would be nice to add more user-friendly documentation, examples and tutorials.
+ *Project architecture* - some ideas of extending or improving core structure to make the project more suitable for some new functionality or fix some flaws may be provided and considered.
